# sudoku-sat: Sudoku solver using a SAT engine
Copyright (c) 2011 Bart Massey

This is a mostly-Haskell (some Bourne Shell) solver for 9x9
Sudoku instances. It works by encoding the instance as a CNF
SAT instance, invoking an off-the-shelf SAT solver, and
translating the resulting SAT assignment back into a Sudoku
solution.

Thus, the software consists of a very simplistic encoder of
9x9 Sudoku instances into CNF SAT instances, together with a
very simplistic decoder of SAT assignments of these
instances into solved Sudoko instances, and a shell script
that automates the whole process.

## Run

The solvers currently supported by the shell script are
`picosat` and `minisat2`, which are available in
Debian. However, most any decent SAT solver should be
workable.  You will also need an installation of `ghc`,
including the `runghc` command. Once you have that, you can
try, for example:

    sh sudoku-sat.sh sudoku-9x9/sudoku-skiena-prob.txt

Take a look at the sudoku-9x9 directory for examples of the
input format. The output format is the same. The sample
problems are autogenerated by me using software I wrote and
had lying around somewhere, with the exception of
`sudoku-skiena-prob.txt`. That one was taken from
[Skiena's Algorithms book](http://www.algorist.com).

## Deficiencies

* The decoder should check that the solution returned is a
  valid Sudoku, and probably should check that it is valid
  for the input instance.

* Standard 9x9 Sudoku is currently hardwired in. You could
  easily change it to 16x16, but only by changing a
  constant in the encoder and in the decoder. You'd also
  have to change the input and output to deal with e.g.
  letters instead of digits.

## License

This work is licensed under the "MIT License".  Please see
the file `COPYING` in the source distribution of this
software for license terms.
